Variable Re-assignment - Part 2: Updating Values

All of our examples so far have shown how to set the value of a variable by using combinations of numbers and other variables. But what if you wanted to do something like add 10 to the current value of a variable?

Because updating the value in a variable is just moving memory around, the process has to go something like this:

Read the current value of a variable.
Add 10 to it.
Store the new value back into the same variable.
The technical term for this is called variable re-assignment - when you change the value of a variable based on its current contents. To increase the value of num1 by 10 you actually need to do this:



num1 = num1 + 10;
The diagram at right shows a picture of what's happening (it assumes the value of num1 is 7 before the line is executed). It's actually very similar to what happens with plain old arithmetic: compute a value, then store it in a variable. Because the computation has to happen before storing the result in a variable, there is no contradiction here.

Common Mistakes & Tips [click to expand]
Do This:

Make a prediction. We start you out with some code again (see below).



Trace the code and predict what you think will be printed to the console. (NOTE: We're serious about this "make a prediction" stuff. When you force yourself to make a prediction about what code will do you will learn faster since it triggers you to apply your mental model of what's happening.)

Run the program to see if you were right.

Add a console.log statement.

We've left you with a little bit of programming to do: add a console.log statement at the end of the program to see the last value of someNum to see if your full prediction is correct.
